[MUSIC]
One of the three approaches drawn
inferences from your data was the path of
Action, the Limon Pearson approach.
In the Nymen Pearson approach, the main
thing is trying to control the errors
when you draw inferences from your data.
When you say yes,
I accept the null hypothesis or
I will reject the null hypothesis,
controlling the amount of times in
the long run that you make a mistake.
Now we talk about this in
terms of the Type 1 and
the Type 2 Errors that you can make.
In the goal of error control,
what you try to do is prevent
making a fool out of yourself,
too often, in the long run and
I think this is a very useful thing to try
when you draw inferences from your data.
Now let's take a look at an example.
Let's say you're walking down the street
and you come across this person.
And you have some suspicions that
this person might be a vampire, but
it could also be someone who's
not getting enough sunlight.
You have to make a decision to either
stake or not stake this individual.
And this person can be a true vampire or
it can just be a random
person on the street.
So we see that there's
a possibility that you
correctly identify this person
as a vampire and stake them.
But you can also make an error.
You can make two types of error.
Type one error is, well this is a vampire
when actually it's not a vampire.
And in this case you would
stake an innocent person.
The second type of error that you
can make, the type two error is
saying that this is probably not
a vampire when it actually is a vampire.
And in this case,
you probably going to end up dead,
because this vampire is going to
suck all the blood out of you.
Let's take a look at some definitions
when we're talking about this topic.
So first,
we have to define the null hypothesis and
the alternative hypothesis,
which we'll often indicate with H0 and H1.
It's important to keep in
mind that the null hypothesis doesn't
necessarily need to be the prediction that
the difference between certain
conditions is exactly zero.
Think about flipping a coin, in which
case the null hypothesis is probably that
there's a 50% probability of
flipping heads and tails.
So the null hypothesis can be anything.
But very often,
it's the idea that there's no difference
between two experimental conditions.
The alpha that we use as
the probability of a significant result
when the null hypothesis is true.
And this is the definition
of a type 1 error rate.
And you're free to set this alpha
at any level that you want.
A very often used level in psychology is
5% but we already saw that in some fields
like physics it's very common to set
in much much lower type one error rate.
And you can also think about areas such as
medicine where it might be useful to set
a much lower error rate as well.
The beta is the probability
of a non-significant result,
given that the alternative
hypothesis is true.
This is known as a type 2 error.
So this is the probability that you'll
say, there is nothing going on here.
When there's actually two
effects to be observed.
If we look at the difference of 1-B,
this is
the probability of the significant result
when the alternative hypothesis is true.
So this is the statistical power.
When you design a study, one minus
the type two error rate is the probability
that you'll actually find the result
if there is a true effect to be found.
Now remember that Naiman thinks that these
error rates are frequentist concepts,
so they apply to the long run.
Now in any single study there's
either a true effect or not.
You were right or you were wrong.
But these error rates are about
long-run frequencies.
So you can be 5% of the time,
you can make a mistake.
But in any single study,
you've either made a mistake or not.
It's important to think
about this in the long run.
So if you do many, many studies, how often
will you make an incorrect conclusion?
Because we have these two situations
where the null hypothesis is true or
the alternative hypothesis is true,
and you can either observe a significant
effect or you will find a non-significant
result, we can divide these
options into these four cells.
And here we can see that when
the null hypothesis is true and
you find a significant effect,
you've made a false positive.
A type I error.
You said there is something here
when there are actually nothing.
When the null hypothesis true you can also
correctly say that there is no true effect
which we called a true negative.
Now in the alternative hypothesis is true.
You find this significance effect,
that's a true positive.
Something is going on and
you correctly identified it.
You can also draw the conclusion
that there is nothing going on,
when there is actually a true effect.
And we call this a false negative.
Now remember that in any single case
you're either sampling from a true effect
or from a false effect.
So you're in one of two parallel worlds.
Either there is no true effect And
then you can only make false positives or
true negatives.
Or you're doing research where there is
actually a true effect and then you can
only make a correct conclusion
a true positive or a false negative.
Now let's take this understanding of
type one errors and type two errors and
true positives and
true negatives to think about what's most
likely to happen in your next study.
I'll describe a typical situation
which I think is fair and
describes many of the studies that we do.
Let say, that you don't really know
if there's a true effect or not.
The null hypothesis might be true, the
alternative hypothesis might be true and
both are equally likely.
Let's give them both 50%, we just
don't know what's going to happened.
We also use a type one error rate,
the alpha of 5% which is very
typical in most research.
And we'll aim for
statistical power of 80%.
Which means that there is
a type two error rate of 20%.
If there is a true effect,
we will not observe it in 20% on the time.
That's sounds like a lot maybe, but
this is actually a very
recommended power to aim for.
So in this specific situation,
let's assume that this
reflects what you want to do.
You use this type 1 error rate.
And you actually exactly
meet this statistical power.
You have 80% power in your next study.
You never really know but
let's assume that this is the case.
Think a moment what's
the most likely to happen.
Will you find a significant result or
a non-significant result?
Make a false positive or a false negative?
And let's do the math and
see what really happens.
So as we said, there's a 50% probability
that a no-hypothesis is true and
a 50% probability that
the alternative hypothesis is true.
Remember, we just didn't know
what was going to happen.
We have a 5% type 1 error rate and
a 20% type 2 error rate.
So, we can use these numbers to
calculate the probability of
each of these four cells to happen, and
of course, they should add up to 100%.
Let's first assume that
the alternative hypothesis is true,
we're examining a true effect.
The probability of finding a significant
effect equals the statistical power that
we have, which is 80% and its 50% probable
that the alternative hypothesis is true.
So we can multiply 80% by 50% and
we find that it's 40% likely that we
conclude that there's a true effect.
A true positive.
It's also possible that we find
a non significant effect this will
happen 20% of the time.
Multiplying 20% with the 50% probability
of the alternative hypothesis being true
gives us a 10% probability
of making a false negative.
Now let's move over to the situation
where the null hypothesis is true.
Here we have a 5% error rate.
We can multiply this 5% times the 50%
probability of the no hypothesis
is true and in 2.5% of the time we'll
conclude that there's a false positive.
We'll say that there is an effect when
there's actually no effect to be found.
And now we come to the most likely outcome
in this very typical situation, a true.
There's a 95% probability that will
conclude that nothing is going on.
Multiply it by the 50%
probability that the null
hypothesis is true which gives us 47.5%.
So that's the highest number of
these four possible outcomes.
And this might be surprising
if you do a new study and
you don't know whether the null is true or
the alternative is true,
you use the recommended alpha level and
the recommended statistical power.
Then the most likely outcome of
your next study is a true negative.
Nothing is going on and you correctly
conclude that nothing is going on.
So you might be surprised that the most
likely outcome is a true negative, and
very often, your interested in
finding significant effect and
finding support for
the alternative hypothesis.
Saying, there is a true effect and
correctly concluding that
there is a true effect.
So how can you improve these
probabilities in the previous slides?
Well there are different options.
Let's take a look at what works best.
You might say, the problem here is
probably that I only had 80% power.
When there is a true effect,
I only had an 80% probability
of finding the effect when it's there, and
I need to increase my statistical power.
Now in this slide you can
see the red numbers and
we have increased the power to 99 percent.
Which means that almost all of the time,
you correctly conclude
that there is an effect when there
is a true effect to be observed.
Our true positive rate
has indeed increased.
But not so much.
You can see that now
it's about 94.5% likely
that you conclude that
there's a true positive.
It is now the most likely outcome but
it's not ridiculously high.
Another idea you might have is say,
well probably the false
positive rate is too high.
Let's reduce the false positive rate.
Set it at 1%.
So Type 1 error is now 1%.
And you can see where changes occur.
Now of course the difference is only
in the situation when no hypothesis is
actually true.
Because you can only make a Type 1
error if the no hypothesis is true.
So we see that there's a reduction in
the number of false positives from 2.5%.
Now it's only 0.5%.
But still,
true negatives are most likely to happen.
So this all doesn't really help.
So whats the most important thing
to do if you want to improve
the probability of
finding a true positive?
What you should do is examine
hypotheses that are likely to be true.
The biggest problem here is this
50/50 prior probability of the no and
the alternative hypothesis being true.
We can see that if it's above
90% probable that we are right.
That our hypothesis is 90% likely to
be true when we start data collection.
You can see that the probability of
a true positive increases sharply.
Now, I always use these calculations
whenever a masters student
enters my office and says,
I have a crazy idea.
I don't know if it's true or
not, but this is my passion,
this is something that I really find
interesting and I want to examine it.
I always say, that's perfectly fine.
But I don't know if
the hypothesis is true or not.
It's 50/50.
Could go either way.
So realize that the most likely outcome
of your research is a true negative.
If you're interested in finding.
Support for the alternative hypothesis,
the best thing you can do is examine
studies that are, or examined hypotheses
that are most likely to be true.
Now let's use a slightly different way
to think about these type one errors and
type two errors and
true positives and true negatives.
This is an illustration of
the null hypothesis and
the alternative hypothesis in
terms of normal distributions.
You can visit this website and play around
with this visualization if you want to.
Let's look at all the different components
here because there's quite a lot of
information.
Now the white bell shaped curve Is the
situation when the no hypothesis is true.
When there is no true
effect to be observed.
You can see that it centered at zero.
So, this reflects the situation
where the no hypothesis is true,
there is no true effect but,
there are some random variation.
Now, if we take a look a light
blue bell shaped curve
This is the distribution when
there is a true effect and
in this case there's a true effect
of a specific size, namely 0.35.
We'll talk about effect sizes
later in the course, but for
now you can see that the likelihood
of finding effects that are large
is much more likely under
the alternative hypothesis.
And under the null hypothesis you'll
find effect sizes that are zero most of
the time There's a certain
critical value that we often use,
it's also illustrated here, and in this
case, this equals a p value of 0.05.
So this is the critical value,
your type one error rate.
Now given this cutoff
off the distributions,
we can make a division between the four
cells that we saw earlier, but
now we're visualizing it in another way.
If we look at the white bell shaped curve
the white area reflects
the true negatives.
There is no true effect to be observed and
we will find it a lot of the time.
We can also make a false positive.
This is still part of
the distribution Often null, so
the white curve slowly moves towards
this red are that you can see.
WIth the area of the false
positives pointing to it.
These are situations when we
observe an extreme result
when the null hypothesis is true.
We're saying that there's something, but
we're actually making a type one error
Now let's switch our attention
to the light blue area.
You can see that this falls on
the right side of the critical value.
So in this case, we are observing p
values that are smaller than 0.05 and
we are correctly saying
that there is an effect.
We're observing a significant result and
there is a true effect to be observed.
So the light blue area corresponds to
the true positives that we'll observe.
Sometimes we'll conclude
that there is no effect
when we're actually sampling from this
reality where this a true effect.
This is illustrated in the dark blue area.
These are false negatives.
The values we observe
are not extreme enough
to lead to a P value smaller than 0.05 So
these are false negatives.
Now the important question
when you're designing is,
which error rates should you aim for?
I already mentioned that the alpha
level in the beta that we often use
is an all 50.05 and the beta of 20% or
a statistical power of 80%.
However stat decisions themselves say
you should not use these benchmarks.
You should think for
yourself what the best choice is.
Neyman himself talks about it in this way.
Is it more serious to convict
an innocent man, or to acquit a guilty?
if you're convicting an innocent man,
this person has gone nothing.
But you're saying this person has done
something, so this is Type 1 error.
If you're acquitting a guilty man,
this person has done something wrong.
But you're saying no crime has been
committed, so this is Type 2 error.
Depending on your beliefs one of these two
types of errors might be more serious.
In the case of medicine,
we can see that you have to weigh this
two types of error very carefully.
If you have Type 2 error and
you are saying, you are not sick.
You don't need any treatment when
the person is actually sick.
There might be very severe consequences
and this person might die.
So there are more likely to
make an error whether you say,
you might have a specific sickness,
we're not completely sure.
And then follow up research will
confirm this in more extensive tests.
So Neyman himself says that determining
how the balance must be struck should be
left to the investigator.
So it's up to you to decide
what types of errors or
what levels of errors you find acceptable.
You don't really need to use these
defaults although they are very tempting.
Cohen himself recommended
this 80% power threshold.
And when he did this, he explicitly hoped
that this recommendation would be ignored
whenever you as a researcher can
make better informed judgements.
At our department for example, we use
typically a 90% power if we're designing
new studies where we hope that they will
lead to insights that we can publish.
So, we have a 90% threshold because we try
to spend the text money on research that
will give us informative results, even
when we don't find a significant result,
we want to be reasonably sure that
there's really nothing there,
that we didn't miss anything.
In the case where you're
examining very impactful things,
where, if you find an effect,
you might have a real breakthrough.
So, missing out on a true
effect is very costly.
You want to increase your power or reduce
your type two error as much as possible
Most of the scientific discoveries that
lead to Nobel prizes are discovered by
people between 35 and 40 years of age.` So
in my case I'm of course keeping my type
two error rate as small as possible.
Because at this moment when I do
a discovery and I miss out on something,
I could may be even be missing out
on a Nobel prize winning idea.
So for me personally, I try to have
high power and low type two error rates.
The type one error rate is
slightly less important.
At the same time,
we see that people are very,
very hesitant to changeType 1 error rates.
You could even increase it.
You could set your Type 1 error rates
to 10% and it's perfectly possible,
If in your specific situation,
this is acceptable.
But it's almost like Moses came
down from the Mount Sinai and
he had this tablet with
a ten commandments and
one of them was you will
always set your alpha to 0.05.
People are very hesitant to change this
but if you really know what you're
doing and you're making an informed
judgement, this is perfectly possible.
So it's very useful to think
about how you can control your
error rates when you're
designing a new study.
You want to minimize one or
both of these types of errors, so
that in the long run, you won't make
a fool out of yourself too often.
[MUSIC]